In your relationships with one another, have the same mindset as Christ Jesus.
Who, being in very nature God, did not consider equality with God, something to be used to his own advantage.
Rather, he made himself nothing by taking the very nature of a servant, being made in human likeness, and being found in appearance as a man, he humbled himself by becoming obedient to death, even death on a cross.
Therefore God exalted him to the highest place,
and gave him the name that is above every name, that at the name of Jesus, every knee should bow in heaven and on earth and under the earth.
And every tongue acknowledged that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God, the Father.
This is the word of the Lord.
Artist Thea Rosenberg published an essay titled, The Backup Plan, documenting the unexpected twist to her plot
midway through her high school years.
She was a sixteen year old playing guitar in a local punk band, delighting in being in the only end crowd in high school that pretends not to want to be in at all.
And then Plot Twist won.
She met the Savior she wasn't looking for and had no idea that she needed.
She got to know Jesus first as a musician, joining the
youth group worship band and sitting up late at night in her bedroom writing her own worship songs of wonder.
It was also euphoric and captivating until plot twist two.
She noticed one day strumming her guitar this strange stinging wrist pain developing an arthritic like pain that grew and grew quite suddenly until she couldn't hold a pick level on a chord progression.
She saw doctor after doctor without answers.
It was like carpal tunnel, but it wasn't carpal tunnel.
It was like tendonitis, only much more severe and constant.
And the snap of her fingers without a dramatic accident or a gradual onset of symptoms or anything of the sort they went from a typical teen to a medical mystery.
Physical therapy appointments replaced band practice.
Ibuprofen and ice wraps became her
bedtime routine, she couldn't open a jar in her family kitchen, or hold a pencil in class on bad days.
Couldn't properly hold, let alone play, a musical instrument.
The good news about our bodies, that's the title of our Linton Teaching Series.
We are taking a long, hard look at the role of the body in the way of Jesus.
Mind, body, and spirit have all been thought of as essential aspects to both our humanity and our Christian spirituality historically.
The modern church, though, has held onto a place for the mind and the spirit, but the body, both inside and outside the church in the Western world, has been left to be defined by the secular imagination rather than the sacred.
The body is thought of as a project to perfect and sculpt as a tool for pleasure or as a source of shame and angst, either because I don't particularly like the body that I'm in personally or because in some quite obvious way, my body doesn't seem to be operating according to created design.
And it's that last bit that I want to zero in on this evening.
What am I to do?
With the way or ways my body seems out of step with God's design for life and flourishing.
Tonight I'm trying to talk to you about your physical handicap, about the wheelchair that you've been in since high school or the hitch in your step that's kept you from ever running and feeling the joy of the wind in your hair.
I'm talking to you about your thyroid problem, the one that lives quietly within you until your early 20s when
Seemingly overnight, weight management became a lifestyle that was just genetically dealt to you.
I'm talking about the digestion issue that you manage that keeps you from going out to eat with ease at a restaurant or even enjoying a meal with your Bridgetown community because you've got to read the fine print ingredients on absolutely everything.
And even when you do your due diligence, you find yourself sick a couple days a week.
I'm talking to you about the guttural pain that wrestles you bedridden every couple of weeks, holding your knees in the fetal position for however long it takes hours or days until you've ridden out the storm that the doctors have no more why to than the weatherman does for a storm that kicks up in the Caribbean.
No more than two weeks ago, Emma, a faithful member and leader here within our church approached me during prayer response on a Sunday gathering just like this one.
and said to me with complete sincerity, Tyler, I cannot bear to praise Psalm 139.
For you created my inmost being.
You knit me together in my mother's womb.
I praise you because I am fearfully and wonderfully made.
Because you see, Emma suffers from a physical disability limiting her mobility.
a diagnosis that she received in utero, a significant physical limitation that she has never known a day on this earth without.
So she went on through a quaking voice that was broken by tears.
If God knit me together in my mother's womb, does that mean he stitched my legs in the gate of my steps, my body this way?
It wasn't so much
A general existential crisis, as it was the most personal, most pivotal question of her spiritual life.
Tyler, she went on, now asking it as plainly and bluntly as she could.
Do you believe that I am fearfully and wonderfully made?
What's your version of Emma's question?
At what part of your body does her question provoke?
Am I fearfully and wonderfully made?
A few of us are self-aware enough or humble enough or maybe courageous enough to ask that aloud, but so many of us ask some version of that question internally.
Psalm 139 is among the most comforting and biblical prayers for the able-bodied, but it might be the most painful of biblical prayers for the disabled body.
Am I fearfully and wonderfully made?
That's the big question for this evening as we address chronic illness and disability.
Swiss American psychiatrist Elizabeth Kubler-Ross popularized the stages of grief through her 1969 book on the topic.
Those stages which are widely respected and frequently referenced are not nor were they ever actually meant to be interpreted as sequential stages through which one overcomes grief.
Rather, they are cyclical experiences that a grieving person goes through again and again and again.
Similarly, we can name a cycle or stages of pain that are commonly experienced by the chronically or significantly ill-injured or limited.
First is the experience of shock, the why me, where we reel from the sudden intrusion of pain and the wind is taken out of us like a gut punch.
And when we finally do begin
to speak or regain our breath.
What usually comes out of us first is some understandable reaction to the injustice of it all.
Then comes determination.
We lay kicking and screaming on the mat long enough to build a resolve to overcome.
Though our first definition of overcoming is almost always subconsciously plotting the recovery of the life we knew before the diagnosis.
Paul recounts his own encounter with Jesus on the road to Damascus in Acts 26, and he includes
I heard a voice saying to me in Aramaic, Saul, Saul, why do you persecute me?
It is hard for you to kick against the goats.
And that last phrase, kick against the goats, it's a reference to a very well-known agricultural saying from Paul's time that we find in both Latin and Greek literature.
Goats were these sharp, slender pieces of wood, picture like a huge thorn.
that farmers would use to guide oxen in a particular direction.
Occasionally, a particular stubborn ox would kick back at the goat by which they were being guided, which of course would only increase the pain while still moving them in the same direction they were going anyway.
That's the biblical description for the determination with which we first respond to chronic diagnosis.
We try to kick back to the life that we knew before, willing and forcing our way against the pain and resulting limitation that we were interrupted by.
We kick against the goats for however long it takes for us to realize that all of our determination is actually giving us no closer to our old life and only increasing the pain.
There's a false consolation to prolong your chronic illness that very few of us get to skip.
You come to terms with the fact that you're going to have to set aside life as you knew it for a time, but we make peace with that under the assumption that we'll get that life back after a long period of waiting.
The real grief comes later when you come to terms with the fact that life as you knew before or assumed you would know it, but never did the very life that everyone else around you seems to think of as normal.
That life will never be yours.
or never again.
That's when determination gives way to exhaustion.
We wear ourselves out kicking and kicking and waiting and waiting.
We persist however long we must, but eventually we just fall on our backs, utterly exhausted, finally surrendering our wills.
And it is just that, the surrender of my will that brings me finally to the fork in the road of suffering, redemption or resentment.
Those are the only two destinations that suffering guides us towards.
One of the better films that I've seen in recent years is this indie flick that dazzled all the critics titled The Sound of Metal.
Now I've referenced this movie a few times before and all to say if you've not seen it at this point, I gave you a whole lot of chances.
The film opens on Reuben, a touring young adult musician, a heavy metal drummer.
His hearing quite suddenly starts to become sparse and intermittent, and in a very short period of time, he loses his hearing entirely.
He responds to the shock of that with anger at first, and then he turns to determination, seeking out specialists and finding a way back to his old life and his first love of rock and roll.
Eventually he cries out an exhausted uncle and checks himself into a 12 step rehabilitation center to face his new life soberly and honestly.
But then along comes this new medical development, a breakthrough hearing aid that promises to be the answer to his problem, to free him from this unwanted loss and limitation.
And in the film's final scene, after driving everyone who loves him away in a determined anger as he fights to get his life back, he pops in those hearing aids standing in front of an old ornate church,
on a street in Paris to hear the clanging of the church bells.
Only those bells, when he hears them, sound crackly and staticky, like an old TV antenna trying to pick up a signal.
You can hear the sound and discern them as church bells, but the beauty of their clang is replaced by this sharp, painful crackle that makes you want to wince and look away, not wonder.
And that's when the credits roll.
The audience left to wonder who Reuben will become.
Redeemed or resentful?
It's a brilliant ending because it's the most honest, most human of endings.
Thaya Rosenberg writes honestly and vulnerably about her own journey through these stages, though she never names them as we just have.
Physical therapy didn't help her.
seemingly couldn't help her, conditioned just worsened and worsened, eventually she surrendered years into her journey, and Théa sold all of her musical instruments, save one acoustic guitar that she kept as a relic of a life that she once had.
It sounds dramatic to say, and then I had to figure out who I was, I know, she writes.
But after that I did have to figure out who I was, because I genuinely didn't know.
for all those formative years, I'd been the musician.
And she caused the spin cycle that chronic pain through her into a time of remaking and it always is that.
Pain remakes us in one of two images, redemption or resentment.
No one chooses to suffer and no one escapes the crucible of suffering unchanged.
We do not get to choose if we will suffer or even how we will suffer.
We only get to choose by our response, the suffering that rudely intrudes upon my life is going to make me more or make me less.
We take that first step toward redemption or resentment, and then we get plunged back into the shock, the injustice of it all, replaying all over us again.
Because remember, these are not sequential stages of pain.
They are a cycle of pain that we tumble around in, like laundry in the dryer.
We are made more by this cycle, redeemed.
One step at a time through surrender, after surrender, after surrender, back into the hands of my maker, or we are made less by this cycle.
Resentful, angry, growing more and more self-centered, self-pitying and self-mastered by surrender, after surrender, after surrender, into the seductive hands of myself.
We either find ourselves saying with Jesus into your hands, I commit my spirit, or we find ourselves echoing our personalized version of the serpents mantra.
You will not shortly die.
I guess what I'm trying to say is that the pain that we experience in this life, particularly the pain that becomes most defining in my personal life, it always places me right back within the biblical story.
And so that's where we will look next.
taking a peek at the theme of chronic illness and disability through a familiar four-part biblical frame.
So let's get our start with creation.
According to Genesis, God did not create a world of pain, but a place he called good every step of the way, and very good when his work was done.
That was and is in stark contrast to every other ancient Near Eastern creation story, all of which emerged from violence and just take human suffering as a given.
The Genesis portrait of Yahweh is of an altogether loving God who created people to live in paradise and the union of heaven and earth entirely apart from death, grief, sadness or pain.
But of course then comes the fall when God's very good creation was corrupted by a deceiver.
God told one story, a serpent told another.
Humanity believed the serpent and the world as we know it today is the product of a lie that humanity believed and lived, resulting in a curse that infected every aspect of God's good world.
So why did children break their arms at playgrounds or come down with the chickenpox or get a cold occasionally when the weather turns?
Why do I suffer from MS or cerebral palsy or alopecia or tuberculosis?
What did I lose or never have one of my five senses?
Why am I victimized by a physical handicap?
Why do we grieve the injustice of infertility, miscarriage, and in utero diagnosis?
Why do we grieve at all weeping over the caskets of everyone that we once held dear, not because God designed the world that way?
but because we listened to and acted in concert with the serpent's lie, not God's love, empowering the serpent to curse the very world that God blessed along with all who live in it.
According to the pages of the Bible, sickness, suffering and death, chronic illness and disability, none of them are products of God's design, but of the serpent's deception and humanity's cooperation.
Now please don't misunderstand what I'm saying here.
I am not saying
that any individual's particular disease or diagnosis is the product of another individual's particular sin or of that individual's own particular sin.
What I am saying is that living outside of Eden has consequences.
The death and sin have infected the very world that we live in and that all suffering is a symptom of sin, the world we chose, not of God, the world he designed.
And when it comes to chronic illness and disability of any and every variety, the Bible is very brief but clear on why suffering entered God's world generally.
But the question that Scripture is much, much more robust and equally clear about, the question the biblical authors direct us to ask, and the question that Jesus claims to be the personified divine response to isn't the why question of suffering, it's the what question.
Not, why did this happen to me?
But what does God do about it?
And that second question, that leaves us onward from the fall to redemption.
And while, of course, redemption starts all the way back on the pages of Genesis and proceeds slowly through the king's prophets and poets who collectively make up what we often refer to as the New Testament today, the redemption of pain undoubtedly all points us to Jesus.
And in Philippians 2, the passage that a few of you hopefully still have your Bibles open to, the ministry of Jesus is summarized as a God who chose human limits, willingly suffers with us, and makes a way through suffering to renew our bodies.
So first, Jesus chose human limits, greatness culturally defined,
always sounds like transcending human limits.
Right?
Greatness in our culture is a famous rock star in an arena tour who's gallivanting around the globe at a pace that keeps him from being deeply rooted.
Greatness is a professional athlete who is driven to break the record, sacrificing relationship and time to all those closest to her to win an award that will wow all those who are furthest.
Greatness is climbing the corporate ladder in an astronomical pace that demands a sharp intellect and demands the willingness to work more hours and go to more business dinners than all of my competitors.
Phaea Rosenberg was finally diagnosed with thoracic outlet syndrome.
In her own story of limitation unwanted, Phaea pointedly confesses, the world I spent my first 17 years living in said I should be limitless.
unfettered by anyone else's expectations, able to be whoever I wanted to be.
Greatness, culturally defined, includes doing more than is expected, more than you thought me capable of, more than seems possible.
Greatness, though, biblically defined, looks more like embracing our limits than transcending them.
Return to your Bibles with me, Philippians chapter two, verse five.
And your relationships with one another have the same mindset as Christ Jesus, who being in very nature, God did not consider equality with God as something to be used to his own advantage.
Rather, he made himself nothing, taking the very nature of a servant, being made in human likeness.
Greatness according to the biblical story is a God who took on full humanity, including the limits of the human body.
Greatness is the God of the universe.
learning to be breastfed.
It is the Word made flesh sounding out the sounds of a first word.
Greatness is the one who would call himself the bread of life, having to learn to chew and swallow like the rest of us.
Before the incarnation, Jesus was limitless and a limitless God limited himself to the feeblest, most helpless of human forms, all in the name of love.
God does not despise limits or try to transcend them, for Jesus' limits seem to be something more like a container for love.
A limitless God choosing a limited existence, that is greatness.
In Christopher Marlowe's play, The Tragical History of Dr. Faustus, Faustus makes a deal with the devil to try to satisfy his hunger for power, and in brokering that deal, he negotiates the terms of the junior demon, and
Just out of curiosity during the negotiation he asked the demon, so what's hell like anyway?
And the demon replies, hell hath no limits.
Hell is a place without limits.
There's a real kingdom truth hidden in that short definition of life apart from God.
What if limits, the limits that we all live within both commonly and uniquely in the human experience, what if limits
Don't hold me back, but set me free.
In his book, Essentialism, author Greg McHughan offers the example of an elementary school built right next to a busy road.
This is the children go out for recess at this elementary school, but they only play on a small patch of grass because there's cars whizzing by on the busy road just a short distance away.
That is until the elementary school builds a fence around a much larger portion of the yard than the children were playing in.
And that's when the children begin to play much more broadly during recess.
Why?
Because the limit of the fence is actually providing more freedom for the children.
So what if for you and me the
unique limits that we live within and our human lives can become an offer to Jesus exactly what they were for Jesus.
A container within which love flourishes within us.
Let's read on Philippians 2 verse 8.
And being found in appearance as a man he humbled himself by becoming obedient to death even death on a cross.
So first Jesus chose human limits
and then Jesus willingly suffers with us.
This is what Hebrews 4 expounds on in verse 15.
For we do not have a high priest who is unable to empathize with our weaknesses, for we have one who has been tempted in every way just as we are, yet he did not sin.
Now this ancient Greek word empathize in Hebrews 4, it's the compound word sympathio, a combination of the Greek words pasco, which means
to suffer and the prefix with, kind of like we have the prefix co in English, co-pilot, co-dependent, co-exist.
Sympathio translated most literally into the English language is co-suffer.
That is how Jesus deals with our pain and limitations.
He co-suffers.
He takes our pains and limitations on himself, sharing my burdens with me.
Jesus chooses our bodily limitation.
He feels our bodily pain.
He even takes on our bodily fate.
Death.
Why?
So that he can wash the lie of the enemy resulting in pain with his love that outlifts it.
Everything within me.
tells me that the limitations of my body are when and where I am furthest from God, most outside of his love and care, most where I can't find him or be found by him.
Hebrews, though, claims it works exactly the opposite way.
That where we are weakest, where we are most limited, Jesus is most drawn to us.
Jesus is drawn to the sick, like Simon Peter's mother-in-law.
and Jairus' daughter and the Centurion's child.
Jesus is drawn to the disabled like the paralytic being led in through the roof by his friends and the invalid lying by the pool and the man on the front row of the synagogue with the withered hand.
Jesus is drawn to the shamed like the sex worker that he welcomes into the Pharisees home where he's having dinner.
Jesus is drawn to the ostracized like the leper and the tax collector.
Jesus has a predisposition for a magnetic draw to the week, because the truth is, every last one of us is weak uniquely.
And where we are weak is precisely where we can be loved most uniquely, most deeply, and most completely.
Back to Thea Rosenberg one more time, because I cut her off before she was finished.
The world I spent my first 17 years living in said that I should be limitless, unfettered by anyone else's expectations, able to be whoever I wanted to be.
God clearly does not despise limitations.
To him, they seem to be synonymous with love.
Modern Western culture associates limitlessness with love.
God associates limits with love, choosing them for himself.
meeting us in our own, and renewing our trust that his love is made perfect in my limits.
Love makes its appeal to us through limits, but so can we become more loving and compassionate through limits.
Remember, we do not get to choose if or how we will suffer.
Only if the suffering that we uniquely endure is going to make us less or make us more.
Those who have suffered are the most empathetic,
present and compassionate, or the most bitter, resentful, and angry.
Visit the Terminal Ward in any hospital, and you will find the angriest and loveliest people alive today.
The most grateful, most joyful, most content, and the most impossible to please, most entitled, and most judgmental.
Pop out of here and stop by an old folks home, on your way home.
Greet someone living there for dinner.
You will find the most effortlessly delightful.
Greeting you like you are the guest of honor.
Thankful for the nastiest, mushiest cafeteria food that you can imagine, like its prime rib at the Ritz because you are sharing a table with me tonight.
And you will find the most vitriolic, angry, venomous people.
because no one remembers me or thinks about me, no one visits me, no one understands me, and life has not been fair to me.
Every human life is either an upward spiral into love, the one word summary of God's character according to the apostle John, or as an endless spiral into the self, which is the definition that C.S.
Lewis gave to sin.
We're either increasingly fashioned into Jesus or into the serpent made in the image of God or the image of the enemy made into love or made into lies.
That is who pain will make you redemption or resentment.
There's only two destinations that cycles fits you into and no one given the choice of who they're going to age into says anger.
I want to become increasingly angry and self centered.
over the days of my life.
And yet so many of us become that.
So then how do we choose love?
You submit to the very limits you would never have chosen.
Now hear me on this.
This is a very important clarification.
I am not saying that God wills bodily brokenness or that bodily brokenness is good.
Our bodies were not designed by God to get sick, break down or die.
The limitations of illness and disability are born from sin, not God.
And when heaven comes to earth, many limits will be transcended when all is renewed, which is why we always and constantly pray for miraculous healing and why we see the healing of the body all over the ministry of Jesus.
And it's why we've talked frequently on the divine healing of the Holy Spirit through the prayers of God's people in the past here in this church and we practice it
and trust in it even now.
What I am saying and what I'm trying to emphasize in relation to tonight's topic is that God is so good and his redemption is so complete that he will work with both the good and the bad in our lives for that redemption.
What God wills and even what God doesn't can become fuel for redemption when it's placed into his hands.
As the apostle Paul says in another of his letters Romans with the enemy intended for evil, God can turn for good.
We tend to think that the good life, the great life is the unlimited uninterrupted life that avoids pain and yet none of us admire and want to become the painless person.
A public opinion poll and
Austria to determine the traits that the general public finds most admirable and others discovered the contrary to pop culture.
It was not the great athletes, actors, artists, or politicians that people admire most.
The most universally admired trait, according to this very broad study, is someone who has gone through something difficult and emerged with their head held high.
It is not the accomplished but those who's suffering has made them more.
who gain our admiration.
Elizabeth Kubler Ross writes, the most beautiful people we have known are those who have known defeat, known suffering, known struggle, known loss, and have found a way out of their depths.
These persons have an appreciation of sensitivity and an understanding of life that fills them with compassion, gentleness, and a deep love and concern.
Beautiful people do not just happen.
All for every
bit of your pain and your body to God as yet another tool in his redemptive hands to refashion you into the fearfully and wonderfully made, God knit and God breathe true self he fashioned first.
God's love is made perfect in my limits and my love can be made perfect in submitting to my limits.
But how exactly does that work practically?
Like how as far as we can define it are my limits
actually linked to Jesus' greatness.
Well, in practice, when it comes to the further integration of your body into your apprenticeship to Jesus, I'll offer a word to both the chronically ill and disabled among us tonight, and a word to the able-bodied and generally healthy among us tonight.
First, to those in this family who are enduring chronic illness or disability, let me simply honor you.
by acknowledging the truth that your lives are an incarnated invitation for the rest of us.
You see in the truest sense, we are all chronically ill because we are all dying.
Some of us just a little bit more obviously than others at the moment, but we're all passing away.
And death our common end, it wasn't God's design, it was the serpent's deception.
The resurrection of Jesus Christ to God willing to get ill, feel pain, suffer and die is the end of death's reign and a way through death back into life by God's design.
Resurrection life says Jesus is a free gift available right now for all who death would want to swallow.
So come, follow me back into the fullest eternal kind of life, only
The way there is quite narrow and you're going to have to walk it with a cross on your back.
And the final passage is through a tomb where you willingly lay down your life that you might truly come alive.
Embrace every limit chosen and unchosen in love for God and others.
God loves you and has a wonderful plan for your life.
Yes, I absolutely agree with that.
So long as we also acknowledge that a part of that wonderful plan God has for your life definitely includes laying every last bit of it down so that you might truly come alive.
Luke 14, Jesus says, whoever does not carry their cross and follow me cannot be my disciple.
So look, we are all, every last one of us in the truest sense, we're chronically ill. Those currently experiencing their death in the form of a prolonged disease, diagnosis or disability, who are lovingly submitting to their unique limits, they're a step ahead of the rest of us on that journey.
They are cutting a path and inviting us to follow behind them.
Embracing my bodily limitations is a core part to embracing my apprenticeship to Jesus.
Now let me just speak personally and say I do not know what it is like to suffer chronic illness or disability.
I know what it's like to endure bodily sickness, bodily injury, and to go through a cancer diagnosis and treatment at a very young age.
I also know that all of us suffer and that suffering is not distributed democratically and therefore suffering cannot and it should not be compared or measured.
but I do not know what it's like to suffer as you suffered uniquely and particularly.
So from where I stand, the life that I stand in right now, the body that I'm standing in in front of you, I want to say to my sick, disabled, aging and dying brothers and sisters whose love is being perfected in that pain, thank you for leading the way for me and for all the rest of us who are beholding the eternal beauty.
of the life that you are leading.
And as for the generally healthy and able-bodied among us, here's how you allow your suffering to make you more.
Embrace your limits.
Pete Gazzaro, the author of Emotionally Healthy Spirituality, he defines limits as my available gifts, time, energy, and knowledge.
So we all have a whole bunch of limits at any given moment in our lives.
Let me just name
three categories of limits that every last one of us in this room is interacting with right now.
First, there's life-stage limits.
A grad school single has certain limits, and a working parent of toddlers has others, and a widow or grandmother still has different ones.
middle school students and young married couples without kids, the middle-aged divorcee splitting custody, the working mother of high schoolers, the working professional empty nester and the retiree with grandchildren.
All of them have limits and all of them have different limits.
No matter what story unfolds in the years of your life, you will always navigate the constraint of limits and those limits will change from chapter to chapter.
Blessing though will constantly be found here.
in submitting to your limits, never in transcending or overcoming them.
Blessing is tied to embracing my limits.
So we all have life-stage limits and we all have physical limits.
Life in a human body is a journey from childhood to increasing capacity until you feel nearly limitless somewhere in your early 20s or so.
And then it's limit upon limit upon limit from there on out.
not unlike Jesus who grew in wisdom and stature and favor with God and man to a point.
And then it was limit upon limit upon limit until he couldn't carry his own cross without health and couldn't walk without staggering couldn't stand up straight and eventually his body gave out on him altogether only to come alive on the other side of death in a way that could not be taken.
And then he invites you and me and anyone who will hear him enter that un-takeable life with him.
And here's the way he says, lay down your life as you know it.
The way is embrace the downward path of limit upon limit upon limit.
Krista Tippett did this interview with the poet Mary Oliver where she asked her, you know, you've said somewhere that you've become more spiritual as you've grown older.
What exactly do you mean by that?
And Mary responds,
I've grown kinder, more people oriented.
I've grown more content to grow old.
How would you define what it means to grow more spiritually mature?
And would you include contentment with growing old in your brief definition?
Here's one of the gifts that our mortal bodies give us as we age.
They can become a vessel in which our soul blooms
and flourishes and bears fruit that lasts in this age and in the age to come.
Provided, of course, that we make peace with the limiting process that our bodies thrust us into as we age.
And can I just gently and lovingly point out that that process of increasing capacity, it's a much smaller window of the average lifespan
than that process of a decreasing capacity of limit upon limit upon limit.
We are schooled in the latter and only briefly experienced the former.
Today is my youngest son Amos' fourth birthday and he woke up this morning and I didn't know this until this quote but I guess he thought well yesterday I was three
Today I'm four, so I'm gonna be bigger.
So when he woke up, the first question he asked is he goes, did I get bigger while I was sleeping?
And it can almost feel like that, right?
Like man, you increase in capacity so quickly.
And then you embrace the downward path of limitation so slowly.
Surely God designed it that way for our redemption.
And finally, to connect back to the topic that we began this teaching series with last week work, we've all got calling limits.
You know, discerning a calling, which is mysterious and beyond the purview of this teaching, and it's a whole lot more art than science, but discerning a calling is so highly sought after of a topic because it's so profoundly free.
But it is even more limiting, right?
Naming a particular calling in my life shuts down a whole lot of other options for my life.
The Christian author and educator Parker Palmer read extensively and quite vulnerably about a long discernment process that culminated for him thanks to the help of God and a trusted community of wise advisors with painfully turning down a very prestigious professional opportunity.
He slowly allowed his ego and ambition to be pried off of this carrot that was dangled out in front of him.
Why would he do that?
More and bigger is better, right?
Well, not if it's outside of your calling.
The unique calling that God places on our lives, it can be squandered in pride and ambition just as easily as it can be squandered in apathy and fear.
Palmer himself writes, if I try to be or do something noble that has nothing to do with who I am, I may look good to others and myself for a while, but the fact that I am exceeding my limits will eventually have consequences.
I will distort myself, the other and our relationship and may end up doing more damage than if I had never set out to do this particular good.
One more time, we do not get to choose if we will suffer or how we will suffer.
Only if the suffering that I uniquely endure is going to make me more or make me less.
Pain will make you love or it will make you lies.
So what limit are you facing?
What limit are you feeling?
in your body right now.
What's it doing to you?
Who's it making you?
Maybe most importantly, what's Jesus's invitation to you within that bodily limit?
Keep in mind I'm asking a question here about Jesus.
Jesus's invitation.
Jesus, who being in very nature, God did not consider equality with God as something to be used to his own advantage.
Jesus, who took on a human form, taking the very nature of a servant, who humbled himself and became obedient to the point of death, even death on a cross, that Jesus.
What limitation are you facing?
What limitation are you feeling in your body right now?
And what's Jesus's invitation to you within that limitation?
The practice for this series as we gather around the table in British tongue communities is fasting through the weekly exercise of renunciation, which is the choosing of temporary limits for the sake of redemption.
All so that I might grow more adept at embracing the limits I don't choose for the sake of the same redemption.
In Jesus we meet a God who chose human limits, who willingly suffers with us, and ultimately who makes a way through suffering to renew our bodies.
Creation, fall, redemption, renewal.
Finally we'll land here this evening, Philippians 2, picking up now in verse 9.
Therefore God exalted him to the highest place and gave him the name that is above every name.
that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow in heaven and on earth and under the earth and every tongue acknowledged that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God the Father.
Love is made perfect in limits and love outlives every limit even the ultimate one death.
Jesus was raised and he was raised bodily.
The first fruits of those who have fallen asleep says the scripture, which is a way of saying that you and I will also be raised and raised bodily.
Jesus took on a death like ours, also that we could take on a life like His, a full, whole, eternal sort of life.
Our bodies, which are subject to pain right now, will be restored to the very painless, ageless, eternally whole form in which He made us first.
One day, every knee
heaven and on earth and under the earth will fall before Jesus's king and on that day there will be no more weeping or mourning or crying or pain because Jesus himself will wipe away every tear that's streaked your cheeks and the old order of things including death sickness and suffering will be washed away the end of the story makes very clear that you will keep
Every bit of his love made perfect to you in your limitations, and you will lose every bit of your pain that rudely intrudes upon you as limitation.
And on that day, you and I will know once and for all, and without a shadow of a doubt, for you created my inmost being.
You knit me together in my mother's womb.
I praise you because I am fearfully and wonderfully made.
not a single one of us knows ourselves fully as he knows us right now.
But today is coming when every last one of us will know ourselves exactly as he knows us even now.
Aaliyah is going to come and guide us to the table this evening.
One of the earliest written texts in the biblical narrative, Chronicles, a seemingly never-ending story of a situational, relational, spiritual, and maybe especially physical suffering of a man named Job.
And at the height of his suffering, Job still displays trust in God that prophetically points to that day to Jesus.
And here's what he has to say.
I know that my Redeemer lives.
and that in the end he will stand on the earth, and after my skin has been destroyed, yet in my flesh I will see God.
I myself will see him, with my own eyes, I, and not another, how my heart yearns within me.
And Job displays this truth, that suffering in the presence of God leads us to yearn for the restoration of the garden.
And it takes us straight to the foot of the cross where all sin, death, and suffering has been defeated and is still being defeated.
So for the past 26 years, part of my story has included chronic illness and disability, a body that more often than not is hard to live in and even harder to call good, let alone God's definition, which is very good.
Pain, numbness, dissociative seizures, nausea, the laundry list of undiagnosable issues kind of goes on and on.
And those symptoms have led to anger.
They've led to great questions and severe suffering in my life.
But I'd say in this body, not in spite of it, but because of the limits it has, I have also experienced the incredible nearness of a perfect God.
who in suffering not only joins me but he goes before me and he's behind me and he walks beside me in that suffering.
So God, this is who he is.
He takes the small and the large deaths that we all experience and he breathes resurrection life into what seems unredeemable.
This is the business that he's in.
So when you walk through suffering, God grieves alongside you
And the Spirit animates the Scripture that we read day in and day out, the promises of when we fix our eyes not on what's seen but what's eternal, we gain this perspective that can't be replaced.
We lift our eyes to a God who holds the universe in his hands but he willingly lowered himself to the confines of a body that experienced the greatest suffering.
We're temples of the Holy Spirit because God is powerful enough to let us take on the identity of Christ.
So the invitation before us now in communion is to remember the good news of Jesus, which says, this is my body broken for you.
So as we come to the table, we follow Jesus' command to remember, not just his miracles or his profound words, but most importantly, his broken body.
What looks like death to us is where God comes near and gives life to the full.
So before we take communion,
Can we just take 15 to 20 seconds right now, say, come Holy Spirit, and just say submit to Him that small or big death that you're carrying right now in this moment, and invite Him into it.
No solutions for Him?
Just let Him do His work.
Holy Spirit, would you come, would you enter?
The things that seem unredeemable in our lives at this very moment.
Thanks for joining the Bridgetown family as we engage in this teaching series.
To learn more about the life of our church and how you can get involved, visit Bridgetown.church slash welcome.
If you're interested in contributing financially to Bridgetown Church and to our ministry, you can do that at Bridgetown.church slash giving.
Wherever you're joining us from, we hope this resource blesses you and encourages you to be with Jesus, become like Jesus, and do what Jesus did.